  COCOM tool set
  Vladimir Makarov, vmakarov@users.sourceforge.net
  May. 18, 2015

  This document describes COCOM tool set oriented towards the creation
  of compilers, cross-compilers, interpreters, and other language pro-
  cessors.

  COCOM tool set is oriented towards the creation of compilers, cross-
  compilers, interpreters, and other language processors. Now COCOM tool
  set consists of the following components:


  o  Ammunition (reusable packages)

  o  Sprut (internal representation description translator)

  o  Nona (code selector description translator)

  o  Msta (syntax description translator)

  o  Oka (pipeline hazards description translator)

  o  Shilka (keywords description translator)

  All of these components are written in ANSI C and have common style
  input languages (a la YACC). All code generated by the components is
  in also strict ANSI C and in standard C++. All documentation exists in
  ASCII, Acrobat Reader, TeX dvi, Postsrcipt, HTML, and GNU info
  formats.

  1. Ammunition (reusable packages)

  Currently there are the following packages:


     allocate
        Allocating and freeing memory with automatic fixing some
        allocation errors.

     vlobject
        Work with variable length objects (VLO). Any number of bytes may
        be added to and removed from the end of VLO. If it is needed the
        memory allocated for storing variable length object may be
        expanded possibly with changing the object place. But between
        any additions of the bytes (or tailoring) the object place is
        not changed. To decrease number of changes of the object place
        the memory being allocated for the object is longer than the
        current object length.

     objstack
        Work with stacks of objects (OS). Work with the object on the
        stack top is analogous to one with a variable length object.
        One motivation for the package is the problem of growing char
        strings in symbol tables. Memory for OS is allocated by
        segments. A segment may contain more one objects. The most
        recently allocated segment contains object on the top of OS.  If
        there is not sufficient free memory for the top object than new
        segment is created and the top object is transferred into the
        new segment, i.e. there is not any memory reallocation.
        Therefore the top object may change its address. But other
        objects never change address.

     hashtab
        Work with hash tables. The package permits to work
        simultaneously with several expandable hash tables. Besides
        insertion and search of elements the elements from the hash
        tables can be also removed. The table element can be only a
        pointer. The size of hash tables is not fixed. The hash table
        will be automatically expanded when its occupancy will became
        big.

     position
        Work with source code positions. The package serves to support
        information about source positions of compiled files taking all
        included files into account.

     errors
        Output of compiler messages. The package serves output one-pass
        or multi-pass compiler messages of various modes (errors,
        warnings, fatal, system errors and appended messages) in Unix
        style or for traditional listing. The package also permits
        adequate error reporting for included files.

     commline
        Work with command line. The package implements features
        analogous to ones of public domain function `getopt'. The goal
        of the package creation is to use more readable language of
        command line description and to use command line description as
        help output of program.

     ticker
        Simultaneous work with several tickers (timers).

     bits
        Work with bit strings (copying, moving, setting, testing,
        comparison).

     spset
        Work with expandable sparse sets of numbers. The implementation
        is based on one descibed in "An Efficient Representation for
        Sparse Sets" by Preston Briggs and Linda Torczon. Memory needed
        for the set is proportional to maximal element value in the set.

     spset
        Work with expandable compact sparse sets of numbers. It has very
        similar interface with `spset'. The algorithm complexities of
        set operations in practice is the same as for package `spset'
        but have bigger constants. Memory needed for the set is
        proportional to number of elements in the set and is node
        depended on element value. It is implemented by special case
        hash tables.

     arithm
        Implementing host machine-independently arbitrary precision
        integer numbers arithmetic. The implementation of the package
        functions are not sufficiently efficient in order to use for
        run-time. The package functions are oriented to implement
        constant-folding in compilers, cross-compilers.

     IEEE
        Implementing host machine-independently IEEE floating point
        arithmetic. The implementation of the package functions are not
        sufficiently efficient in order to use for run-time. The package
        functions are oriented to implement constant-folding in
        compilers, cross-compilers.

     earley
        The package `earley' implements earley parser. The earley parser
        implementation has the following features:

        o  It is sufficiently fast and does not require much memory.
           This is the fastest implementation of Earley parser which I
           know. The main design goal is to achieve speed and memory
           requirements which are necessary to use it in prototype
           compilers and language processors. It parses 30K lines of C
           program per second on 500 MHz Pentium III and allocates about
           5Mb memory for 10K line C program.


        o  It makes simple syntax directed translation. So an abstract
           tree is already the output of Earley parser.


        o  It can parse input described by an ambiguous grammar.  In
           this case the parse result can be an abstract tree or all
           possible abstract trees. Moreover it produces the compact
           representation of all possible parse trees by using DAG
           instead of real trees. This feature can be used to parse
           natural language sentences.


        o  It can parse input described by an ambiguous grammar
           according to the abstract node costs. In this case the parse
           result can be an minimal cost abstract tree or all possible
           minimal cost abstract trees. This feature can be used to code
           selection task in compilers.

        o  It can make syntax error recovery. Moreover its error
           recovery algorithms finds error recovery with minimal number
           of ignored tokens. It permits to implement parsers with very
           good error recovery and reporting.


        o  It has fast startup. There is no practically delay between
           processing grammar and start of parsing.


        o  It has flexible interface. The input grammar can be given by
           YACC-like description or providing functions returning
           terminals and rules.


        o  It has good debugging features. It can print huge amount of
           information about grammar, parsing, error recovery,
           translation. You can even output the result translation in
           form for a graphic visualization program.

  Current state: Implemented, documented, and tested. All these packages
  have been used in several products.

  Under development: Design of some reusable packages for compilers.

  2. SPRUT (internal representation description translator)

  SPRUT is a translator of a compiler internal representation
  description (IRD) into Standard Procedural Interface (SPI). The most
  convenient form of the internal representation is a directed graph.
  IRD defines structure of the graph. SPI provides general graph
  manipulating functions. The defined graph nodes can be decorated with
  attributes of arbitrary types.

  IRD declares types of nodes of the graph. Nodes contains fields, part
  of them represents links between nodes, and another part of them
  stores attributes of arbitrary types. To make easy describing internal
  representation the IRD supports explicitly multiple inheritance in
  node types. There can be several levels of internal representation
  description in separate files. The nodes of one level refer to the
  nodes of previous levels. Therefore each next level enriches source
  program internal representation. For example, the zero level
  representation may be internal representation for scanner, the first
  level may be internal representation for parser, and so on.

  SPI can contains functions to construct and destroy graphs and graph
  nodes, to copy graphs or graph nodes, to read and write graphs or
  graph nodes from (to) files, to print graphs or graph nodes, to check
  up constraints on graph, to traverse graphs, and to transform acyclic
  graphs in some commonly used manners. SPI can also check up the most
  important constraints on internal representation during work with node
  fields. SPI can automatically maintain back links between internal
  representation nodes.

  Using SPRUT has the following advantages:

  1. brief and concise notation for internal representation

  2. improving maintainability and as consequence reliability of the
     compiler

  3. user is freed from the task of writing large amounts of relatively
     simple code

     Current state: Implemented, documented, and tested. SPRUT has been
     used in several products (the biggest one is extended Pascal cross-
     compiler with moderate optimizations and with 3 different internal
     representations).

  3. NONA (code selector description translator)

  NONA is a translator of a machine description (MD) into code for
  solving code selection and possibly other back-end tasks. The machine
  description is mainly intended for describing code selection task
  solution, i.e. for determining by machine-independent way a
  transformation of a low level internal representation of source
  program into machine instruction level internal representation. But
  the machine description can be used also to locate machine dependent
  code for solving other back-end task, e.g. register allocation. To
  describe machine description a special language is used.

  An machine description describes mainly tree patterns of low level
  internal representation with associated costs and semantic actions.
  NONA generates the tree matcher which builds cover of low level
  internal representation by the tree patterns with minimal cost on the
  first bottom up pass and fulfills actions associated with the chosen
  tree patterns on the second bottom up pass. Usually the actions
  contain code to output assembler instruction.

  Analogous approach for solving code selection task is used by modern
  generator generators such as BEG, Twig, Burg and Iburg. The tree
  matcher generated by NONA uses algorithm similar to one of BEG and
  Iburg, i.e. the algorithm is based on dynamic programming during
  fulfilling code selection.

  Although the algorithm used by BURG and based on dynamic programming
  during tree pattern matcher generation time is considerably more fast,
  it is not acceptable for us. Its main drawback which is to need usage
  of less powerful machine description results in necessity of usage of
  more machine-dependent low level internal representation. For example,
  the special internal representation node types for 8-bits, 16-bits
  constants besides 32-bits constants would be needed. Also the
  algorithm used by BURG is considerably more complex.

  Tree pattern matchers generated by NONA also can work with directed
  acyclic graphs besides trees. This feature is useful when target
  machine instruction is generated from the internal representation
  which is result of some optimizations such as common sub-expression
  elimination.

  Current state: Implemented, documented (only plain text), and tested.
  NONA has been used in several products (the biggest is extended Pascal
  cross-compiler for superscalar RISC processor `AMD 29500' with
  moderate optimizations).

  Under development: Additional generation of the tree pattern matcher
  based on dynamic programming during generation of the tree pattern
  matcher. Pascal implementation experience shows that time of the tree
  pattern matcher work is practically the same as the time of all front-
  end work.

  4. MSTA (syntax description translator)

  The MSTA can emulate YACC (Posix standard or System V Yacc). The MSTA
  have the following additional features:

  o  Fast LR(k) and LALR(k) grammars (with possibility resolution of
     conflicts). Look ahead of only necessary depth (not necessary given
     k). Originally LALR(k) parsers are generated by modified fast
     DeRemer's algorithm. Parsers generated by MSTA are up to 50% faster
     than ones generated by BISON and BYACC but usually have bigger
     size.

  o  Extended Backus-Naur Form (EBNF), and constructions for more
     convenient description of the scanners. More convenient naming
     attributes.

  o  Optimizations (extracting LALR- and regular parts of grammars and
     implementing parsing them by adequate methods) which permit to use
     MSTA for generation of effective lexical analyzers. As consequence
     MSTA permits to describe easily (by CFG) scanners which can not be
     described by regular expressions (i.e. nested comments).

  o  More safe error recovery and reporting (the 1st additional error
     recovery method besides error recovery method of YACC).

  o  A minimal error recovery and reporting (the 2nd additional error
     recovery method besides error recovery method of YACC).

  o  Fast generation of fast parsers.

     Current state: Implemented, documented, and tested. Now MSTA is
     stable. More verbose documentation is needed.

  MSTA uses several methods (parser optimizations) nowhere described.

  5. OKA (pipeline hazards description translator)

  OKA is a translator of a processor pipeline hazards description (PHD)
  into code for fast recognition of pipeline hazards. A pipeline hazards
  description describes mainly reservations of processor functional
  units by an instruction during its execution. The instruction
  reservations are given by regular expression describing
  nondeterministic finite state automaton (NDFA). All analogous tools
  are based only on deterministic finite state automaton (DFA).

  OKA is accompanied with the scheduler on C and C++ for scheduling
  basic blocks.

  Current state: Implemented, documented, and tested. OKA has been used
  in experimental C/C++ compiler for Alpha.

  6. SHILKA (keywords description translator)

  SHILKA is oriented to fast recognition of keywords and standard
  identifiers in compilers. SHILKA is analogous to GNU package `gperf'
  but based on minimal pruned O-trie which can take into account the
  frequency of keyword occurrences in the program. Gperf can not make
  it. SHILKA is up to 50% faster than Gperf. SHILKA is also simpler than
  Gperf in the usage.

  Current state: Implemented, documented, and tested.

  7. DINO interpreter

  DINO is high level scripting dynamic-typed language. DINO is oriented
  on the same domain of applications as famous scripting languages perl,
  tcl, python. The most of programmers know C language. Therefore Dino
  aims to look like C language where it is possible. Dino is an object
  oriented languages with garbage collection. Dino has possibilities of
  concurrent execution, pattern matching, and exceptions handling. Dino
  is an extensible language with possibility of dynamic load of
  libraries written on other languages. The high level structures of
  Dino are

  o  heterogenous extensible arrays

  o  extensible associative tables with possibilities of deleting table
     elements

  o  objects

     Originally, Dino was used in a russian graphics company ANIMATEK
     for description of movement of dinosaurs in an project. It has been
     considerably redesigned and implemented with the aid of COCOM tool
     set.

  In future, I am going to implement more libraries fo DINO. Any help in
  this will be appreciated. I am also going to use DINO for compiler
  prototyping.

  Current state: Implemented, documented, and tested. Experimental
  status.



